Here is Peter Norvig's review of the text.
     	      	       
		       Inbox		X	
							
 
Reply
 
|
Lyle ungar	
The previous best book on NLP was James Allen's (1995), which was considered ...
    
10:02 AM (11 hours ago)
Lyle ungarLoading...	
10:02 AM (11 hours ago)
Lyle ungar
 to Dean
 
show details 10:02 AM (11 hours ago)
     
The previous best book on NLP was James Allen's (1995), which was
considered ambitious at the time because it covered syntax, semantics
and some pragmatics. But Martin and Jurafsky is far more ambitious,
because it covers speech recognition as well, and has far expanded
coverage of language generation and translation. It also covers the
great advances in statistical techniques that have marked the last
decade. It is a beautiful synthesis that will reward the experienced
expert in the field with new insights and new connections in the form
of historical notes that are not well known. And it is well-written
and clear enough that even the beginning student can follow it
through. Before this book, you would have had to read Allen's book,
Charniak's short book on statistical NLP, something on speech
recognition, and something else on generation and translation. Like
squeezing clowns into a circus car, Jurafsky and Martin somehow,
improbably, manage to squeeze this all into one book, but in a way
that is elegant and holds together perfectly; not at all the
hodge-podge that one might expect. I expect that this book will be
seen as one of the landmarks that pushes the field forward.

It's worth comparing this book to the other recent NLP text: Manning
and Shutze. Jurafsky and Martin cover much more ground, including many
aspects that are ignored by Manning and Schutze. So if you want a
general overview of natural language, if you want to know about the
syntax of English, or the intricacies of dialog, if you are teaching
or taking a general NLP course, then Jurafsky and Martin is the one
for you. But if your needs are more focused on the algorithms for
lower-level text processing with statistical techniques, or if you
want to build a specific practical application, then Manning and
Schutze is far more comprehensive and likely to have your answer. If
you're a serious student or professional in NLP, you just have to have
both.

