
Baseline:

Suppose you are neutrally buoyant when you don't have any air in your
lungs.  (requires being dead.)  Then your %body fat is 18%.  Multiply
this by your weight, and you have your base line fat.

If you are neutrally bouyent (while alive) after exhaling all your
breath, you still have a lot of air in your lungs 

	air in lungs (resigual) = 1.2 liters (1.2 kg buoyancy)
		
You then can subtract 6kg (13 lbs) of fat from your base line.

If you are neutrally bouyent when you take a full breath:

	air in lungs (resigual) = 6 liters (6 kg buoyancy)

You then can subtract 30 kgs (66 lbs) from your your base line fat.

-----

example:

	I'm basically 200lbs.  So, my baseline fat is 36 lbs.  I sink
when I exhale my breath in a swiming pool.  So I have less than 30 lbs
of fat.  I shouldn't be able to sink when I have a full breath, since
that would give me a negative amount of fat.

-----


"Underwater weighing is the most widely available indirect method for
measuring body composition and is the gold standard for fat
measurement. You can calculate the density of your body and thus your
percentage of fat by dividing your body weight (scale weight) by your
body volume (underwater weight). Muscles have a higher density and fat
a lower density than water. In this procedure, fat people float and
weigh less underwater, while lean people sink and weigh more
underwater. Underwater weighing assumes that every cubic centimeter of
lean tissue weighs 1.1 gram and every cubic centimeter of fat weighs
0.9 grams. This method also assumes that your body in 73.2% water."

from: http://www.globalhealthandfitness.com/bodyfat.htm

"Tidal volume is the amount of air taken into the lungs in a single
breath. In the average adult, tidal volume is about 0.5
liters. However, the lungs can hold a total of about 4-6 liters, which
is close to ten times the tidal volume. This amount is known as the
vital capacity. Vital capacity is the maximum volume expelled after
maximal inspiration. Vital capacity can only be reached during
strenuous exercise. In order to find the total lung capacity (TLC), we
must take the residual volume (the volume remaining in the lungs after
maximal expiration) into account. Total lung capacity can be found by
adding the vital capacity and the residual volume. The residual volume
is usually 25 % of the TLC while the Vital capacity makes up the other
75%."

http://hypertextbook.com/facts/2001/LaurenCalabrese.shtml