
------------------------------

Date: Tue, 29 Sep 1998 13:17:26 -0400
From: Rich Williams <rbw@soul.hdtv.lucent.com>
To: tandem@hobbes.ucsd.edu
Subject: Exercise and Longevity
Message-ID: <36111626.67D8F42D@soul.hdtv.lucent.com>

A small article from this past Sunday New York Times about the
life extending effects of exercise. The article cites a study from
the Stanford University of Medicine that tracked 52,000 men
over the course of many years.

To sum up the study: For each hour of vigorous exercise, you
get an extra two or three hours of life.

The study considered "vigorous" to be expending 2,000 calories
a week in exercise - equivalent to running 20 miles a week. The
beneficial effect seemed progressive at least up to 3,500 calories
a week.

As if you needed another excuse to get on the bike and ride.

Rich Williams
'98 CoMotion Co-Pilot




         By NICHOLAS WADE

             or an outstanding athlete to die at age 38, her world records still unbroken, as Florence Griffith Joyner did last week, is a blunt
             reminder that fine physical condition is no guarantee of longevity. 

         As when the runner and author Jim Fixx died at 52 of a heart attack while jogging 14 years ago, an athlete's early death raises the
         question of whether too much exercise strains the heart or other parts of the body, like running a machine beyond its endurance
         levels. After all, exercise requires metabolism, and metabolism generates free radicals, those harmful reactive chemicals that vitamin
         pills and other supplements are said to combat. 

         The notion that vigorous sports may actually be bad for you is hardly new or illogical. Every tale of a former football player with brain
         damage or bad knees can reinforce a popular notion that a life committed to strenuous athletics carries bodily stress to unhealthy
         levels. 

         But there is no evidence that exercise in itself reduces life span. The truth seems to be that athletes who die young, in general, have
         perished from one of the usual causes of premature death. (Drug use is one.) 

         Hard exercise, unfortunately, seems to be rather good for the body, however much pain and perspiration is involved. Doctors in
         ancient times believed that vigorous exercise was harmful. And even though the Italian physician Bernadino Ramazzini of Modena
         observed in 1700 that fleet-footed messengers were healthier than sedentary tailors and cobblers, the orthodox medical suspicion of
         heavy exercise was not dispelled until the 1930s. That was when physicians concerned about the health and longevity of university
         oarsmen in England and America found to their surprise that the oarsmen were living longer than the general population. 

         Subsequent studies have yielded mixed results. Professional baseball players were found to live no longer than the average Joe. But
         Finnish endurance athletes lived six years longer than average conscripts and power sportsmen an extra year and a half. 

         Faster. Farther. Better. 

         The present advice from health authorities that we should all exercise more rests largely on a continuing survey of 52,000 men who
         entered Harvard or the University of Pennsylvania between 1916 and 1950. The survey, by Dr. Ralph Paffenbarger of the Stanford
         University School of Medicine, shows that men who exercise hard and regularly tend to live longer. 

         Expending 2,000 calories a week in vigorous activity -- the equivalent of jogging or walking briskly for 20 miles -- bought a 25
         percent reduction in the chance of dying during the study period, Paffenbarger has found. The effect was progressive at least up to
         3,500 calories (35 miles) a week. 

         Can the body actually wear out from excessive exercise? "We do not find any hazardous level of exercise," Paffenbarger said, though
         he noted that even the most vigorous athletes in his study tend to exercise less as they grow older. 

         Star college athletes who have become sedentary live no longer than anyone else, Paffenbarger has found. But men who take up
         exercise later in life appear to gain the same benefits as lifelong exercisers. Paffenbarger's rule of thumb is that for each hour of
         vigorous physical activity, you get an extra two or three hours of life. 

         That may not seem so great a deal, but exercise affects more than just the quantity of life. It also improves its quality by making
         people feel healthier. It lowers the heart rate and blood pressure, increases the high density lipoprotein in the blood and decreases the
         low density lipoprotein. All of that is known to be good for the cardiovascular system. 

         Many people lack the time or inclination to jog 20 miles a week, and health experts -- rather than delivering sermons they know will
         be ignored -- have taken to preaching that even moderate exercise is good. Though Paffenbarger's figures provide no evidence that
         moderate exercise prolongs life, moderate exercise produces the same kind of cardiovascular changes, though to a lesser degree, as
         occur in vigorous exercise. Thus it seems a reasonable bet that moderate exercise is better than none. 

         Jim Fixx took up running because his father died of a heart attack at 43; he himself lived until age 52. It's sad that any athlete should
         die in the prime of life. But without all that physical activity, death might strike even more prematurely. 





          Home | Site Index | Site Search | Forums | Archives | Marketplace 

           Quick News | Page One Plus | International | National/N.Y. | Business |
        Technology | Science | Sports | Weather | Editorial | Op-Ed | Arts | Automobiles |
                Books | Diversions | Job Market | Real Estate | Travel 

               Help/Feedback | Classifieds | Services | New York Today 

                 Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company 
