


         PERSONAL HEALTH

         Adding Years to Life and Life to Years

         By JANE E. BRODY

                eople with bad health habits that they will not or cannot abandon often make excuses:
                "What's the point of living longer -- you'll only spend more years in a nursing home?" or
                "A healthy life really isn't any longer, it just seems that way." 

         Perhaps the saddest excuse of all dates back to 1964 when
         the Surgeon General issued the first report on smoking
         and health. Diehard smokers told me, "By the time I get
         lung cancer, they'll know how to cure it." If only that had
         happened. But 34 years later we are hardly closer to curing
         lung cancer than we were then. 

         The fact is none of these excuses hold up under the
         scrutiny of sound medical research, and a recently
         published study of more than 1,700 men and women
         followed for 32 years puts the lie to them all. 

         The study, published in April in The New England Journal
         of Medicine, clearly showed that people with healthier
         habits not only live longer, they live better, experiencing
         only half as much chronic disability as their less-prudent
         age mates. 

         The findings strongly suggest that vitality into one's later
         years is less a matter of genes and more a question of how a
         person chooses to live. Those who smoked the least, stayed
         trim and exercised regularly not only lived longer but were
         less likely to develop disabilities. Even among participants
         who died, the low-risk people had shorter periods of
         disability before dying. 

            Changing Mortality Curve 

                n 1980, Dr. James Fries, professor of medicine at Stanford University, published a
                provocative article suggesting that preventive health practices would keep Americans
                healthier longer and change the shape of the nation's disability and death curve from one
         that resembles a water slide to one that looks more like a cliff. 

         According to his "compression of morbidity" hypothesis, most Americans, instead of experiencing
         a more-or-less steady rate of increasing disability and deaths starting at mid-life, could live
         reasonably well into their 80's, before they begin to die at an accelerated rate. 

         To put it another way, if people could be persuaded to choose more prudent health habits, the
         majority would reach their ninth decade in good health and then die after, at most, a relatively brief
         period of illness. 

                             But some skeptics challenged Fries, suggesting instead that practicing good
                             health habits, while likely to add years to life, would also swell the number
                             of years during which people are beset by chronic illness and disability. If
                             true, critics said, this would further overwhelm an already overburdened
                             system struggling to care for millions of elderly Americans with costly,
                             debilitating, lingering health problems. 

                             Healthy Habits Do Pay 

                ow, nearly two decades after Fries's proposal, he and his colleagues have data that dispute
                the naysayers. According to their new findings, living healthfully would not only add years
                to life, it would also add life to years, keeping people well and able to enjoy life far longer
         than they otherwise might have. 

         Although the participants' average age was only 75 at the last assessment, there is every indication
         that those with healthy habits will on average remain in better health however long they live.
         Those whose habits put them at lowest risk for health problems delayed the average age at which
         they developed even minimal disability by nearly seven years -- to age 73 as against age 66 for
         those at highest risk. 

         The researchers tracked 1,741 men and women who graduated from the University of Pennsylvania
         in 1939 and 1940. These alumni were surveyed by other researchers at the time of graduation and
         again in 1962, 1976 and 1980 before the Stanford team took over and reassessed their health habits
         and health status annually for seven years starting in 1986. 
